# Miden Client
# Miden client

The Miden client provides a way to execute and prove transactions, facilitating the interaction with the Miden rollup.

### Status

The Miden client is still under heavy development and the project can be considered to be in an *alpha* stage. Many features are yet to be implemented and there is a number of limitations which we will lift in the near future. We develop the Miden client in [this repo](https://github.com/0xPolygonMiden/miden-client/tree/main).

## Overview

The client's main responsibility is to maintain a partial view of the blockchain which allows for locally executing and proving transactions. It keeps a local store of various entities that periodically get updated by communicating with the node.

The Miden client can be used as 

1. library, which can be used by other project to programmatically interact with the Miden rollup.
2. binary which is a wrapper around the library exposing its functionality via a simple command-line interface (CLI).

## Usage

### Installing the CLI

Miden client v0.1 requires Rust version **1.73** or later.

You can then choose to run the client CLI using `cargo`, or install it on your system. In order to install it, you can run:

```sh
cargo install --path .
```

This will install the `miden-client` binary in your PATH, at `~/.cargo/bin/miden-client`. 

For testing, the following way of installing is recommended:

```sh
cargo install --features testing,concurrent --path .
```

The `testing` feature allows mainly for faster account creation. When using the the client CLI alongside a locally-running node, you will want to make sure the node is installed/executed with the `testing` feature as well, as some validations can fail if the settings do not match up both on the client and the node.

The `concurrent` flag enables optimizations that will result in faster transaction execution and proving.

After installing the client, you can use it by running `miden-client`. In order to get more information about available CLI commands you can run `miden-client --help`.

### Connecting to the network

Currently, the client is hardcoded to run commands against a locally-running node. Calls will be routed to the default RPC socket of `miden-node` (that is, `localhost:57291`).

## Example: Executing, proving and submitting transactions

### Prerequisites

- Currently, the client allows for submitting locally-proven transactions to the Miden node. Currently, the easiest way to test the client is by [generating accounts via the genesis file](https://github.com/0xPolygonMiden/miden-node?tab=readme-ov-file#generating-the-genesis-file). 
- For this example, we will make use of 1 faucet account and 2 regular wallet accounts, so you should set your node's `toml` config file accordingly. We will refer to these accounts as having IDs `regular account ID A` and `regular account ID B` in order differentiate them.
- Once the account files have been generated, [make sure the node is running](https://github.com/0xPolygonMiden/miden-node?tab=readme-ov-file#running-the-node). If the node has some stored state from previous tests and usage, you might have to clear its database (`miden-store.sqlite3`).

### 1. Loading account data

In order to execute transactions and change the account's states, you will first want to import the generated account information by running `miden-client account import`:

```bash
miden-client account import <path-to-accounts-directory>/*.mac
```

The client will import all account-related data generated by the node stored as `*.mac` files, by default on the `./accounts` subdirectory generated by the node, and insert them in the local store. You should now be able to see the accounts by doing:

```bash
miden-client account list
```

### 2. Synchronizing the state

As briefly mentioned in the [Overview](#overview) section, the client needs to periodically query the node to receive updates about entities that might be important in order to run transactions. The way to do so is by running the `state-sync` command:

```bash
miden-client sync-state -s
```

Running this command will update local data up to the chain tip. This is needed in order to execute and prove any transaction.

### 3. Minting an asset 

Since we have now synced our local view of the blockchain and have account information, we are ready to execute and submit tranasctions. For a first test, we are going to mint a fungible asset for a regular account.

```bash
miden-client transaction new mint <regular-account-ID-A> <faucet-account-id> 1000
```

This will execute, prove and submit a transaction that mints assets to the node. The account that executes this transaction will be the faucet as was defined in the node's configuration file. In this case, it is minting `1000` fungible tokens to `<regular-account-ID-A>`. 

This will add a transaction and an output note (containing the minted asset) to the local store in order to track their lifecycles. You can display them by running `miden-client transaction list` and `miden-client input-notes list` respectively. If you do so, you will notice that they do not show a `commit height` even though they were submitted to the operator. This is because our local view of the network has not yet been updated. After updating it with a `sync-state`, you should see the height at which the transaction and the note containing the asset were committed. This will allow us to prove transactions that make use of this note, as we can compute valid proofs that state that the note exists in the blockchain.

### 4. Consuming the note

After creating the note with the minted asset, the regular account can now consume it and add the tokens to its vault. You can do this the following way:

```bash
miden-client transaction new consume-note <regular-account-ID-A>
```

This will consume the first available note. You can also pass a Note ID to this command (which you can list as stated in the previous step). You will now be able to see the asset in the account's vault by running:

```bash
miden-client account show <regular-account-ID-A> -v
```

### 5. Transferring assets between accounts

Some of the tokens we minted can now be transferred to our second regular account. To do so, you can run:

```bash
miden-client state-sync -s # Make sure we have an updated view of the state
miden-client transaction new p2id <regular-account-ID-A> <regular-account-ID-B> <faucet-account-ID> 50 # Transfers 50 tokens to account ID B
```

This will generate a Pay-to-ID (`P2ID`) note containing 50 assets, transferred from one regular account to the other. If we sync, we can now make use of the note and consume it for the receiving account:

```bash
miden-client state-sync -s # Make sure we have an updated view of the state
miden-client transaction new consume-note <regular-account-ID-B> # Consume the note
```

That's it! You will now be able to see `950` fungible tokens in the first regular account, and `50` tokens in the remaining regular account:

```bash
miden-client account show <regular-account-ID-B> -v # Show account B's vault assets (50 fungible tokens)
miden-client account show <regular-account-ID-A> -v # Show account A's vault assets (950 fungible tokens)
```

### Clearing the state

All state is maintained in `store.sqlite3`, located in the same directory where the client binary is. In case it needs to be cleared, the file can be deleted; it will later be created again when any command is executed.